[ZIP 215] Fix Ed25519 validation rules to allow batch verification (#355)
zcash/zips: zip-0215.rst

::

  ZIP: 215
  Title: Explicitly define Ed25519 validation rules
  Owners: Henry de Valence <hdevalence@zfnd.org>
  Status: Proposed
  Category: Consensus
  Created: 2020-04-27
  License: BSD-2-Clause

Terminology
===========

The key word "MUST" in this document is to be interpreted as

> described in RFC 2119. [#RFC2119]_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
described in `RFC2119`_.
```

the integer encoding the `y`-coordinate of the points may be unreduced modulo
`2^255-19`.

Rationale
=========

This change simplifies the Ed25519 validation logic and reduces future
maintenance burden.  Because multiplication by the cofactor admits more
solutions to the verification equation, not fewer, it is compatible with all
existing Ed25519 signatures on the chain.  

It also allows the use of batch verification, which requires multiplication
by the cofactor in the verification equation.

Security and Privacy Considerations
===================================

This change has no effect on honestly-generated signatures.  Unlike the current
validation rules, it makes it possible for a user to generate weak signing keys
or to generate signing keys with nonzero torsion component and submit them to
the blockchain.  However, doing so provides them with no advantage, only
compromise to their own security.  Moreover, these cases are not a failure mode
of any deployed implementation.

Deployment
=========

This is intended to be deployed with the Canopy Network Upgrade, which is 
scheduled to activate on mainnet at block height 1046400. 

> References

Reviewer: ```suggestion

References
```

::

  ZIP: 215
  Title: Fix Ed25519 validation rules
  Owners: Henry de Valence <hdevalence@zfnd.org>
  Status: Proposed
  Category: Consensus
  Created: 2020-04-27
  License: BSD-2-Clause

Terminology
===========

The key words "MUST", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "MAY", "RECOMMENDED",
"OPTIONAL", and "REQUIRED" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in RFC 2119. [#RFC2119]_

Abstract
========

Zcash uses Ed25519 signatures as part of Sprout transactions.  However, Ed25519

> does not clearly define criteria for signature validity, and RFC-conformant
> implementations need not agree on whether signatures are valid.  This is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
does not clearly define criteria for signature validity, and implementations conformant to [RFC 8032](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8032) need not agree on whether signatures are valid.  This is
```

::

  ZIP: 215

>   Title: Fix Ed25519 validation rules

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Title: Modifying Ed25519 validation rules to allow batch verification
```

  Owners: Henry de Valence <hdevalence@zfnd.org>

>   Original-Authors: Henry de Valence

Reviewer 2: `Original-Authors` isn't needed if it is the same people as `Owners`.

```suggestion
```

>   Status: Active

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Status: Draft
```

Reviewer 2: (We will change it to Proposed when we publish.)

  Category: Consensus
  Created: 2020-04-27
  License: BSD-2-Clause

Terminology
===========

The key words "MUST", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "MAY", "RECOMMENDED",
"OPTIONAL", and "REQUIRED" in this document are to be interpreted as

> described in RFC 2119. [#RFC2119]_

Reviewer 2: Typically we only define the key words that are actually used.

Abstract
========

Zcash uses Ed25519 signatures as part of Sprout transactions.  However, Ed25519

> does not clearly define criteria for signature validity, and RFC-conformant

Reviewer 2: implementations conformant to RFC 8032 (and make that a reference)

implementations need not agree on whether signatures are valid.  This is
unacceptable for a consensus-critical application like Zcash.  Currently, Zcash
inherits criteria for signature verification from an obsolete version of

> `libsodium`.  Instead, this ZIP clears the situation by explicitly defining the

Reviewer 2: s/clears/settles/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`libsodium`.  Instead, this ZIP settles the situation by explicitly defining the
```

Ed25519 verification criteria and changing them to be compatible with batch
verification.

Motivation
==========

The lack of clear verification criteria for Ed25519 signatures poses a

> maintenance burden.  Zcash inherited precise validation criteria from a
> then-current version of `libsodium` (1.0.15).  However, `libsodium` never
> guaranteed stable validation criteria, and changed behavior in a later point
> release.  This forced `zcashd` to use an older version of the library before
> eventually patching a newer version to have consistent validation criteria.  An
> attempt was made to encode these criteria into the Zcash specification, but the
> specification did not match the `libsodium` behavior, and had to be updated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
maintenance burden.  The initial implementation of Zcash consensus in `zcashd`
inherited validation criteria from a then-current version of `libsodium` (1.0.15).
Due to `a bug in libsodium <https://github.com/zcash/zcash/issues/2872#issuecomment-576911471>`_,
this was different from the intended criteria documented in the Zcash protocol
specification [#protocol]_ (before the specification was changed to match
`libsodium` 1.0.15 in specification version 2020.1.2). Also, `libsodium` never
guaranteed stable validation criteria, and changed behavior in a later point
release. This forced `zcashd` to use an older version of the library before
eventually patching a newer version to have consistent validation criteria.
```

To be compatible, Zebra had to implement a special library, `ed25519-zebra` to

> provide Zcash-flavored Ed25519, attempting to match `libsodium` exactly.  And

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
provide Zcash-flavored Ed25519, attempting to match `libsodium` 1.0.15 exactly.  And
```

the initial attempt to implement `ed25519-zebra` was also incompatible, because
it precisely matched the wrong compile-time configuration of `libsodium`.

In addition, the validation criteria used by Zcash preclude the use of batch
verification of Ed25519 signatures.  While signature verification is not the
primary bottleneck for Zcash, it would be nice to be able to batch-verify
signatures, as is the case for RedJubJub.

Specification
=============

> After activation of this ZIP, the `JoinSplitSig` validation rules are changed to the following:

Reviewer 2: Reference section 5.4.5 of the protocol spec.

Reviewer 2: Use math markup in this section, e.g.
```
:math:`latex_goes_here`
```

> - `A` and `R` MUST be encodings of a point on the Edwards form of Curve25519;

Reviewer 2: The spec uses underbar for variables that denote byte-array representations.
```suggestion
- :math:`\underline{A}` and :math:`\underline{R}` MUST be encodings of a point on the Edwards form of Curve25519;
```

> - `s` MUST represent an integer less than `l`;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- :math:`underline{S}` MUST represent an integer less than :math:`\ell`;
```

- The group equation `[8][s]B = [8]R + [8][k]A` MUST be satisfied, where `k` is defined as in RFC 8032 §5.1.7.

The language about `ExcludedPointEncodings` in §5.4.5 of the Zcash
specification is deleted.

It is *not* required that `A` and `R` are canonical encodings; in other words,
the integer encoding the `y`-coordinate of the points may be unreduced modulo
`2^255-19`.

Rationale
=========

This change simplifies the Ed25519 validation logic and reduces future
maintenance burden.  Because multiplication by the cofactor admits more
solutions to the verification equation, not fewer, it is compatible with all
existing Ed25519 signatures on the chain.  

> It also allows the use of batch verification, which requires multiplication of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It also allows the use of batch verification, which requires multiplication
```

> by the cofactor in the verification equation.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps add a more detailed explanation of why.

Security and Privacy Considerations
===================================

This change has no effect on honestly-generated signatures.  Unlike the current
validation rules, it makes it possible for a user to generate weak signing keys

> or to generate signing keys with nonzero torsion component and submit them to

Reviewer 2: just say "it makes it possible for a user to generate signing keys with nonzero torsion component".

(Signing keys can already be weak in other ways, e.g. having low entropy in the private key.)

the blockchain.  However, doing so provides them with no advantage, only
compromise to their own security.  Moreover, these cases are not a failure mode
of any deployed implementation.

> 

Reviewer 2: Add a Deployment section that states this is intended to be deployed in NU4.

A References section will also be needed (at least to RFCs 2119 and 8032, and the protocol spec).

Due to `a bug in libsodium <https://github.com/zcash/zcash/issues/2872#issuecomment-576911471>`_,
this was different from the intended criteria documented in the Zcash protocol
specification [#protocol]_ (before the specification was changed to match
`libsodium` 1.0.15 in specification version 2020.1.2). Also, `libsodium` never
guaranteed stable validation criteria, and changed behavior in a later point
release. This forced `zcashd` to use an older version of the library before
eventually patching a newer version to have consistent validation criteria.
To be compatible, Zebra had to implement a special library, `ed25519-zebra` to
provide Zcash-flavored Ed25519, attempting to match `libsodium` 1.0.15 exactly.  And
the initial attempt to implement `ed25519-zebra` was also incompatible, because
it precisely matched the wrong compile-time configuration of `libsodium`.

In addition, the validation criteria used by Zcash preclude the use of batch
verification of Ed25519 signatures.  While signature verification is not the
primary bottleneck for Zcash, it would be nice to be able to batch-verify
signatures, as is the case for RedJubJub.

Specification
=============

> After activation of this ZIP, the `JoinSplitSig` validation rules are changed to the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After activation of this ZIP, the `JoinSplitSig` validation rules in §5.4.5 of the 
protocol specification [#protocol]_ are changed to the following:
```

::

  ZIP: 215

>   Title: Fix Ed25519 validation rules

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Title: Explicitly define Ed25519 validation rules
```

  Owners: Henry de Valence <hdevalence@zfnd.org>
  Status: Proposed
  Category: Consensus
  Created: 2020-04-27
  License: BSD-2-Clause

Terminology
===========

> The key words "MUST", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "MAY", "RECOMMENDED",
> "OPTIONAL", and "REQUIRED" in this document are to be interpreted as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key word "MUST" in this document is to be interpreted as
```

described in RFC 2119. [#RFC2119]_

Abstract
========

Zcash uses Ed25519 signatures as part of Sprout transactions.  However, Ed25519

> does not clearly define criteria for signature validity, and RFC-conformant
> implementations need not agree on whether signatures are valid.  This is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
does not clearly define criteria for signature validity, and implementations conformant 
to `RFC8032`_ need not agree on whether signatures are valid.  This is
```

The language about `ExcludedPointEncodings` in §5.4.5 of the Zcash
specification is deleted.

It is *not* required that `A` and `R` are canonical encodings; in other words,
the integer encoding the `y`-coordinate of the points may be unreduced modulo
`2^255-19`.

Rationale
=========

This change simplifies the Ed25519 validation logic and reduces future
maintenance burden.  Because multiplication by the cofactor admits more
solutions to the verification equation, not fewer, it is compatible with all
existing Ed25519 signatures on the chain.  

It also allows the use of batch verification, which requires multiplication
by the cofactor in the verification equation.

Security and Privacy Considerations
===================================

This change has no effect on honestly-generated signatures.  Unlike the current
validation rules, it makes it possible for a user to generate weak signing keys
or to generate signing keys with nonzero torsion component and submit them to
the blockchain.  However, doing so provides them with no advantage, only
compromise to their own security.  Moreover, these cases are not a failure mode
of any deployed implementation.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Deployment
=========

This is intended to be deployed with the Canopy Network Upgrade, which is 
scheduled to activate on mainnet at block height 1046400. 
```
